<chapter id="intro">
 <title>Introduction</title>

 <sect1>
  <title>Where am I?</title>
  <para>
   You are currently looking at a piece of documentation for xine.
   xine is a free video player. It lives on
   <ulink url="http://www.xine-project.org/">http://www.xine-project.org/</ulink>. Specifically
   this document goes under the moniker of the "xine Hackers' Guide".
  </para>
 </sect1>

 <sect1>
  <title>What does this text do?</title>
  <para>
   This document should help xine hackers to find their way through
   xine's architecture and source code. It's a pretty free-form document
   containing a loose collection of articles describing various aspects
   of xine's internals. It has been written by a number of people who work
   on xine themselves and is intended to provide the important concepts and
   methods used within xine. Readers should not consider this document to be
   an exhausative description of the internals of xine. As with all projects
   which provide access, the source-code should be considered the definitive
   source of information.
  </para>
 </sect1>

 <sect1>
  <title>New versions of this document</title>
  <para>
   This document is being developed in the xine-lib cvs repository within
   the directory <filename>doc/hackersguide/</filename>. If you are
   unsure what to do with the stuff in that directory, please read the
   <filename>README</filename> file located there.
  </para>
  <para>
   New versions of this document can also be obtained from the xine web site:
   <ulink url="http://www.xine-project.org/">http://www.xine-project.org/</ulink>.
  </para>
 </sect1>

 <sect1>
  <title>Feedback</title>
  <para>
   All comments, error reports, additional information and criticism
   concerning this document should be directed to the xine documentations
   mailing list <email>xine-docs@lists.sourceforge.net</email>.
   Questions about xine hacking in general should be sent to the
   developer mailing list <email>xine-devel@lists.sourceforge.net</email>.
  </para>
 </sect1>

</chapter>
